7.2 Management of fatigue

Although many individuals with FRDA report fatigue, there is little reported evidence regarding management strategies. However, the use of behavioral management, pharmacological intervention, alternative therapies and/or a specific diet have been reported in like conditions. These interventions are reviewed below.
7.2.1 Behavioral management
Due to a lack of studies, there is no direct evidence showing the benefits of behavioral management in individuals with FRDA. However, the clinical experience of the authors and published research in other neurological conditions, such as multiple sclerosis and neuromuscular diseases (2-9), favors (with low-level evidence) the consideration of using behavioral management for individuals who report fatigue with FRDA. This is because the overall benefit may be greater than not using behavioral management. Behavioral interventions include mindfulness, energy conservation, use of assistive devices, sleep hygiene, stress reduction, cognitive behavioral therapy, relaxation, and avoiding multitasking.
7.2.2 Physical activity
Due to a lack of studies, there is no direct evidence showing the benefits of physical activity programs in individuals with FRDA experiencing fatigue. However, the clinical experience of the authors and published research in other neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis (10-15) favors (with moderate certainty of evidence) the consideration of physical activity programs for individuals who report fatigue with FRDA.
7.2.3 Pharmacological intervention
There is very low certainty of evidence demonstrating small beneficial effects of pharmacological intervention (antioxidants, antidepressants, e.g., idebenone, citalopram) for individuals with FRDA reporting fatigue.
7.2.4 Alternative therapies/physical modalities
Due to a lack of studies, there is no direct evidence showing the benefits of alternative therapies/ physical modalities in individuals with FRDA. There is only very limited evidence of beneficial effects from using alternative therapies/physical modalities (i.e., light therapy, cooling therapy, pulsed electromagnetic devices, acupuncture) in published research in other neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis (16, 17). Based on current research evidence no recommendation for alternative therapies/physical modalities can be made for individuals with FRDA reporting fatigue.
7.2.5 Specific diet
Due to a lack of studies, there is no direct evidence showing the benefits of a specific diet (i.e., vitamins, coffee, Mediterranean, ketogenic) in individuals with FRDA. There is only very low-level evidence of beneficial effects of applying a specific diet in published research in other neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis (18-20). Therefore, no recommendation for a specific diet can be made at this time.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary