10.2 Screening and management of osteoporosis in Friedreich ataxia

10.2.1 Effects of Friedreich ataxia on bone health
Osteoporosis is a skeletal disorder characterized by impaired bone strength. Osteoporosis increases risk of fractures, and is an endemic disease mainly in the elderly (50). In adults, a diagnosis of osteoporosis can be made based upon deficits in bone density alone. By contrast, the diagnosis of osteoporosis in a child requires a history of clinically significant low-trauma fractures (commonly defined as a single vertebral fracture, two long bone fractures before age 10, or three long bone fractures by age 19), with or without a finding of low bone density for age (areal bone mineral density (aBMD) Z-score of -2 or lower for age and sex) (51). Diminished bone loading, due to neuromuscular weakness and/or the inability to tolerate weight bearing activity, is a common cause of impaired bone strength in children and young adults with chronic disease (52, 53). Although individuals with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) are known to have increased risk for scoliosis and foot deformities, there have been few studies on bone density and risk of fractures in FRDA.
Data from the Friedreich Ataxia Clinical Outcome Measures (FA-COMS) registry showed that 2.1% (23/1104) of people with FRDA reported osteoporosis or osteopenia, and 9.7% (107/1104) reported a fracture, of which none were vertebral/spinal or femoral fractures (54). However, these numbers likely underestimate the prevalence of impaired bone health, since many patients may not have undergone appropriate screening procedures required to identify low bone mineral density.
In one pilot study, bone mineralization was examined systematically in a small study cohort of individuals with FRDA; the prevalence of low bone mineral density was nearly 20% (55). Furthermore, increased severity of ataxia was associated with decreased aBMD of both the femoral neck and lumbar spine, indicating perhaps that ataxia-related decreases in mobility could contribute to decreased bone density. In addition, GAA repeat length, an index of genetic disease severity, was also associated with low bone density, and it may be that the disease itself has adverse impacts on bone health. This study also showed that a majority of individuals with FRDA presented with low 25-OH vitamin D levels (55), which is associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures (56, 57).
10.2.2 Screening bone health
Adults with Friedreich ataxia
Screening for low aBMD, which characterizes osteopenia and osteoporosis, includes dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and a structured evaluation of fracture history. The mobility status of individuals with FRDA might impact bone mineral density, as demonstrated in a small cross-sectional study where there has been a significantly lower aBMD in the femoral neck (of the hip) in individuals with FRDA who use wheelchairs (55). Measurement of forearm aBMD and/or distal femur could complement traditional assessments in individuals who are mostly non-ambulatory, as these skeletal sites have yielded additional insights in related populations.
Though there is no direct evidence of screening benefit in FRDA, we recommend screening aBMD in adults with FRDA since there are available treatments if low aBMD is identified, and at least one study found a substantial burden of clinically relevant low aBMD in FRDA (55). Radiation exposure during a DXA scan is extremely low and therefore not considered a relevant risk of screening. The determination of low aBMD and consequently the initiation of an appropriate therapy/prophylaxis could potentially prevent fall-related fractures, and could thus maintain or improve quality of life and prolong capacity for ambulation. While FRDA-specific evidence should be collected, there is persuasive evidence in a range of other populations and conditions for the benefits of osteoporosis therapy, such that opportunities to treat in FRDA should not be missed. In adults with FRDA and osteoporosis, there are a range of approved therapies from which an individualized treatment regimen can be selected by a clinician with relevant expertise.
Children with Friedreich ataxia
No data regarding bone mineralization status or risk of low aBMD in children with FRDA are available. Recent consensus statements (58, 59) highlight the potential utility of DXA in other similar conditions where risk for secondary osteoporosis may be increased, and DXA results may influence treatment decisions. The most appropriate timing for initiation of universal screening is not clear. The utility of universal screening may be lower in individuals with FRDA who have a relatively low burden of comorbidities and minimal limits to ambulation, although there are not yet data to guide this decision. Most appropriate recommendations regarding screening may depend on the age and pubertal status of the child, related imaging results, integrated assessment of fall risk, as well as priorities of patients and families.
In general, risk factors that would support DXA screening in children with FRDA include a clinically significant fragility fracture (long bone or spine), and/or decline in functional status, in particular transition to being mainly non-ambulatory. The frequency of subsequent scans will be guided by degree of aBMD deficit on the initial scan and the clinical scenario (fracture history, ambulatory status, etc.). Per current ISCD guidelines (60), total body less head (TBLH) and lumbar spine (LS) are the standard DXA scan sites in children. In patients with lumbar scoliosis, LS scans will not be accurate and alternate sites should be considered. Hip should be considered in ambulatory adolescents where ongoing need for bone density monitoring into adulthood is expected. Lateral distal femur (if local expertise is available) should be considered in non-ambulatory patients who are anticipated to be at increased risk of distal femur fractures. Forearm scans can also be considered if unable to perform other sites due to factors including scoliosis, contractures, or indwelling hardware. Vertebral fracture assessment by lateral spine x-ray or DXA should be considered in patients with back pain localized to the vertebral column and/or a lumbar spine (aBMD Z-score of -2 or lower), or other suggestive features on DXA (e.g., a lack of expected increase in lumbar spine aBMD).
Screening for low vitamin D
Since vitamin D levels are dependent on several variables (time/season of year at assessment, degree of latitude, activity outdoors) screening might be more widely used in corresponding conditions (e.g., high latitude/low sun exposure, low activity outdoors). Since assessment of vitamin D is done through routine venipuncture and generally available (e.g., during routine laboratory assessments in FRDA, such as glucose, HbA1c) and vitamin D3 supplements (with or without calcium) are widely available, annual assessment of vitamin D (25-OHD) to determine the need for supplementation is warranted, ideally near the end of winter.
10.2.3 Management of low vitamin D, calcium and bone mineral density
Nutritional approaches are reasonable to optimize bone health in individuals with FRDA. Low 25-OH vitamin D levels were present in the majority of the study population in the pilot study described above (55). Since vitamin D deficiency has been associated with an increased risk for osteoporosis and fractures (56, 57), ensuring adequate intake of vitamin D3, along with calcium for bone mineralization, is appropriate.
With respect to pharmacologic treatment options, although there is no FRDA-specific evidence with respect to the benefit of anti-osteoporotic therapy, the pathophysiology and clinical course of FRDA-related bone disease is likely to be similar to what has been described in other forms of secondary osteoporosis arising from neuromuscular weakness and immobility. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that evidence supporting the use of bisphosphonates to increase aBMD in children with osteoporosis secondary to conditions including cerebral palsy, spinal muscular atrophy and Rett syndrome may be relevant to the FRDA population (61-64). In addition, in adults with FRDA, the full and rapidly evolving armamentarium of approved pharmacologic therapies for osteoporosis, including anti-resorptive and anabolic agents, should be considered according to individualized assessments by a clinician with relevant expertise.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary