16.2 The role of digital and assistive technologies in improving independence

Interventions aimed at maintaining or improving independence in people with FRDA can either be compensatory, that is interventions that improve function by compensating for the underlying deficit; or restorative, that is interventions that aim to facilitate restoration of function by adaptation and recovery within the neuro‐musculoskeletal system (1).
As a consequence of disease progression individuals with FRDA become increasingly dependent on adaptive equipment. Symptoms including ataxia, muscle weakness, spasticity and bony changes such as scoliosis and foot deformity interfere with the ability to mobilize, attend to personal daily tasks and to stand and transfer independently, the latter of which is a significant contributor to ongoing maintenance of independence. Given there is limited evidence regarding the provision of adaptive equipment for people with FRDA, clinical reasoning underlying provision of adaptive equipment is largely based on evidence from similar progressive, neurological conditions. It is critical however that the clinician prescribing the equipment is familiar with the particular issues related to FRDA and experienced in the adaptive equipment prescribed. In particular, the prescription of the first wheelchair can be seen as a significant milestone in the progression of the condition; hence, ensuring active involvement of both the client and parents (if appropriate) is critical (2). Here, mobility should not be the only focus of attention, but also possible neuromuscular deformities such as poor posture due to the presence of scoliosis (e.g., adjustment of a seating system, with for example, foam or gel inserts, to improve seated posture).
16.2.1 Health monitoring and self-management
Health monitoring and alert devices have becoming increasingly available in recent years; however, their adoption into real-life use has been low in like conditions (3). Examples include phone applications that track physical activity, prompt/remind for medication, monitor clinical indicators (e.g., heart rate) or provide tools for self-management strategies (sleep, fatigue management). Digital tracking and monitoring tools are used to support self-management and personalized health care in like conditions; however, the acceptance of these apps and devices depends on the person experiencing the value of the device and being well equipped to use them (3). Further development of these tools is required to ensure they are adaptable to a person’s own situation, there is support to understand the information gathered and there are links into clinical treatment plans (3). For people with FRDA there are a number of medical co-morbidities which might be better monitored or managed through the use of digital assistive technology. Smart watches that can monitor heart rate, sleep cycles or prompts for medication regimes may be useful. Technology such as blood glucose monitoring systems may also be helpful in a person managing their FRDA-related diabetes (see Chapter 10, section 10.1). Applications to record, track and prompt healthy lifestyle behaviors or therapy tools for physical exercise can be useful to provide a person with FRDA an opportunity to engage in self-management. Given there is limited evidence for the use of these systems, it is vital that any digital or assistive technology be explored with appropriate clinical reasoning and full involvement of the person with FRDA to ensure they are well equipped to use the device or technology.
16.2.2 Communication aids
There is limited research in like conditions related to assistive technology for use in communication and to facilitate workplace participation. One study in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a like condition with progressively deteriorating expressive communication and upper limb function, suggests that early use of tablet-based assistive technology for communication is beneficial and has positive impacts on quality of life, particularly as the condition progresses and more complex alternative strategies are required (4). For people with FRDA, customized communication devices that compensate for upper limb, vision, hearing and/or speech deficits may enhance communication and workplace opportunities (see Chapter 3.5).
16.2.3 Environmental control

16.2.4 Mobility aids
Customized assistive technology for mobility includes modified vehicles, wheelchairs, traction devices, transfer devices (sling or standing hoists, sit to stand aids such as Sara Stedy [https://www.arjo.com/int/products/patient-handling/standing-and-raising-aid/sara-stedy/], ETAC turners [https://www2.etac.com/en-us/products/product-archive/manual-transfer/etac-turner/]), walkers, adaptive seating and positioning aids. These devices can assist a person to mobilize, transfer, access the home or community and participate in all aspects of daily life.
Due to progressive muscle weakness, ataxia, spasticity and other neuromuscular changes the needs for assistive technology will probably change over time. There may be a progression from transfers in standing/stepping to the use of standing/sling or track hoists and lifters to enable safe transfers in a person’s environment. A thorough assessment of a person’s functional abilities within the context of their own environment is crucial to selecting the most appropriate device for mobility, transfers and seating. A focus on maintaining active participation in mobility and transfers is critical to maintaining engagement of muscles, which is important in maintaining muscle strength. A sling hoist removes any active participation of the person’s upper body, core or lower body and is frequently used from a lying or supported sitting position. Alternatively, a standing hoist is used from a sitting position with the sling just around the middle of the body and this allows engagement of upper limb and lower limbs in the process of helping with standing. Preserving active use of upper limbs, core and lower limbs in any way is important for a person with FRDA and the use of transfers is a further opportunity for these muscles to be engaged on a daily basis. Despite the sometimes unconventional techniques for transfers, a balance between risk and independence must be considered. Moving too quickly from a standing transfer to a hoist can have unintended consequences in addition to further loss of lower limb strength, for core strength, foot and ankle muscle length and upper limb function.
Individuals with FRDA benefit from the provision of grab rails to assist in attending to activities of daily living. Given that ataxia is a core impairment, it is essential that grab rails be correctly positioned to ensure that during the transfer the person is able to maintain their center of gravity over their knees and feet. As such, grab rails positioned to facilitate pulling up, rather than pushing up may be of more benefit. Likewise, provision of wheeled commode/shower chairs requires customization to the specific requirements of a person with FRDA including stability and ease of maneuverability and transfer. This may include lowering the seat height to facilitate safe transfers, utilizing smaller seat apertures and ensuring an appropriate seat width to avoid extraneous trunk movement while in use.
16.2.5 Compensatory techniques
Compensatory techniques include interventions such as the use of weighted and adaptive equipment such as specialized cutlery, feeding and writing implements that feature both weighted, non‐slip and larger grips (5, 6) and weighting of the distal component of the limb during activity (7-10). The use of simple strategies to decompose multi‐joint movements to more accurate single joint movements (1, 11), minimize reaching movements and stabilize proximal joints (12) have also been proposed. Practically, this includes stabilizing the elbows on the table while feeding oneself, sliding the hand on the table to facilitate grasp instead of grasping in space, use of orthotics to stabilize joints (in particular the wrist), using two hands to grasp objects or using one hand to stabilize the other while manipulating an object. Training in independence tasks may also consider the significance of visuomotor or proprioceptive loss on functional capacity. People with FRDA may use vision to compensate for sensory impairment; however, the inherent delay in using visual feedback to correct motor performance needs to be factored into training and provision of equipment (e.g., programming of motorized wheelchairs).
As mentioned, a detailed assessment of functional capacity in the context of the individual’s everyday environment such as home, work or community is critical to developing appropriate strategies to improve independence. The goals of intervention aimed at maximizing function in each environmental context can be incorporated into subsequent strategies and modifications to facilitate independence. Clinical reasoning is essential to avoid a prescriptive approach to the provision of adaptive equipment. For example, it is of greater benefit if people with ataxia are able to pull up, rather than push up on grab rails in order to maintain the center of gravity over their feet and thus ensure safety while transferring. Such clinical reasoning is necessary in most situations when providing adaptive equipment and modification of environment. Table 16.1 provides a summary of compensatory techniques for specific activities of daily living.
Table 16.1: Suggested interventions/aids to facilitate independence in daily activities

16.2.6 Restorative techniques
Restorative techniques include the use of physical rehabilitation, relaxation and biofeedback (13-15). However, these are not widely used in clinical practice for people with FRDA.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary