3.9 Sexual function in Friedreich ataxia

This chapter describes the effects of Friedreich ataxia on sexual function, the functional consequences of these effects, and strategies for assessing and managing sexual dysfunction. In making recommendations for management, the authors were tasked with answering the question:
For individuals with Friedreich ataxia, what management strategies could be implemented for disturbance of sexual function?
3.9.1 Disturbance of sexual function in Friedreich ataxia
Two studies indicate that people with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) may experience difficulties in intimate sexual relationships (1, 2). In one study, sexual dysfunction was quantified in 83% (30/36) of individuals with FRDA administered the Arizona Sexual Experience Scale (2). Likewise, the impact of FRDA on sexual functioning, sexual satisfaction and the capacity to form intimate relationships was explored in an online survey completed by 107 individuals with FRDA (1). Erectile dysfunction was reported in 57% (20/35) of males, inadequate vaginal lubrication interfering with sexual responsiveness was reported in 57.7% (26/45) of females, and reduced genital sensation in 47% (51/107) of respondents. In addition, 88% (94/107) reported problems moving their body during sexual activity due to muscle spasm and/or tightness, fatigue and weakness, and 73% (78/107) reported reduced confidence about their sexuality due to FRDA (1).
3.9.2 Functional consequences of disturbance of sexual function
The presence of FRDA may impact sexual functioning, sexual satisfaction and the capacity to form intimate relationships. The sexual response is a complex phenomenon (3), and in people with FRDA may well be influenced by multiple factors including the function of neurological, cardiac or vascular systems; attitudes towards sexuality; or the individual’s self-esteem or self-worth (4). In addition, individuals report that the psychological, social and emotional effects of living with FRDA does affect sexual activity and fulfilment (1). Sexual dysfunction has not been shown to be related to clinical severity (2); however, a relationship between a younger age of onset and sexual dysfunction has been reported, reinforcing the importance of asking questions about sexual function as soon as appropriate (1).
3.9.3 Assessment and management of sexual dysfunction
3.9.3.1 Assessment of sexual function
Sexual dysfunction in people with neurological conditions can be devastating (4). It is essential the clinician does not ignore this fundamental aspect of a person’s life and individuals with FRDA should be encouraged to discuss sexual function in the clinical setting (1). In particular, it is important that the clinician establishes whether sexual dysfunction is a problem and clarifies the nature, history and characteristics of any sexual dysfunction. This should include details of libido, genital sensation, erectile function, lubrication, ejaculation, orgasm and menstrual function. A clinical examination and investigations may also be indicated as shown in Figure 3.9.1. The effect of concurrent conditions such as depression, and medications such as SSRIs and anti-hypertensives should also be explored (5).
3.9.3.2 Management of sexual dysfunction
A careful history will identify if primary aspects of sexual dysfunction are amenable to pharmacological intervention (such as phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors in the case of erectile dysfunction) or if interventions to manage associated issues, such as depression or physical or sensory impairment compromising sexual function, are indicated. Whilst there is currently no direct evidence related to FRDA to support referral to psychologists and/or sex therapists for counseling, there may be benefit from advice regarding alternative sexual positions, use of stimulation devices and techniques, managing fatigue and managing reduced self-esteem (4, 6). The role of counseling in managing sexual dysfunction warrants further empirical attention.
Figure 3.9.1 Algorithm summarizing management approaches (from Corben et al, 2021 (1))

There is little evidence regarding the benefits of commencing a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor in males with FRDA who report erectile dysfunction; however, there is sufficient evidence to indicate erectile dysfunction may be a problem and evidence in other neurological conditions that treating erectile dysfunction with phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors would be of benefit (7). Treatment goals should be balanced between the needs of the person and potential side effects, including possible cardiac impacts.
It is not clear if low testosterone is a consistent feature of FRDA, so routine testing of serum testosterone in men reporting sexual dysfunction is not supported. However, we suggest morning serum total testosterone should be tested in males with FRDA with clinically suspected hypogonadism, or if first-line treatment of erectile dysfunction is unsuccessful.
Whilst high rates of poor vaginal lubrication are documented in women with FRDA there is no evidence to support the use of estrogen creams in FRDA. Moreover, the use of these agents would depend upon a risk assessment, particularly in terms of the individual’s risk for developing breast or uterine cancer. Vaginal lubricants (aqueous/oil-based/silicone) are generally the first-line option for managing poor vaginal lubrication.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary