6.1 Reduced pulmonary function and pulmonary infection

6.1.1 The effects of Friedreich ataxia on pulmonary function
There are no large-scale published data on pulmonary function tests in Friedreich ataxia (FRDA). Bulbar dysfunction and muscle weakness (related to upper motor neuron pathology) do occur in FRDA and may lead to restrictive lung disease. Neuromuscular restrictive lung disease typically leads to nocturnal hypoventilation causing sleep disturbance and abnormal nocturnal blood gases, with deleterious effects. Nocturnal problems may be compounded by the occurrence of obstructive sleep apnea. In a small unpublished observational study, close to 20% of participants with FRDA had one or more abnormal pulmonary function test (PFT) values, usually in those with more advanced FRDA (Corti, Smith & Subramony, unpublished data).
Other neuromuscular disorders such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in which some data exist and care guidelines have been developed, are not strictly comparable due to greater degree of muscle strength loss in these illnesses; nevertheless, these can serve as models for the care of individuals with FRDA (1-4).
6.1.2 Monitoring pulmonary function
Monitoring for reduced pulmonary function should be done at least annually in Individuals with FRDA with advanced disease (i.e., non-ambulatory; or earlier if symptoms of sleep disordered breathing are elicited) during clinic visits.
Monitoring at clinic visits should include the following:
● Administer a neuro-respiratory checklist including questions about orthopnea, dyspnea during ordinary daytime activities, apnea during the night, poor sleep quality during the night, morning headache, decreased attention and concentration during the daytime, excess daytime sleepiness, excessive fatigue and repeated chest infections (5)
● Administer a sleepiness questionnaire (e.g., Epworth sleepiness scale) and a fatigue scale
● Assess respiratory excursions and cough strength during physical examination
● In individuals with advanced FRDA, perform tests for different respiratory muscle groups at least annually, including:
 ○ Spirometry: measure forced vital capacity (FVC) sitting and supine. A significant decline in supine FVC reflects diaphragmatic dysfunction
 ○ Other PFT measures such as lung volumes and maximal respiratory pressures
 ○ Peak expiratory cough flow (PECF)
 ○ Pulse oximetry and end tidal CO2 or transcutaneous pCO2
 ○ Polysomnography with capnography if obstructive sleep apnea or nocturnal hypoventilation is suspected based on above clinic based assessments.
6.1.3 Management of reduced pulmonary function and preventing pulmonary infection

● Consider chest physiotherapy and respiratory strength training. This may be more useful in the event of an acute intervening medical issue such as lung infection or surgery.
● For help with airway clearance, manual assisted coughing or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation (MI-E) is recommended if FVC < 50% predicted or PECF < 270 L/min or when maximum expiratory pressure is < 60 cm H2 Individual titration of MI-E is recommended.
● Initiate nocturnal assisted non-invasive ventilation (NIV) if any of the following indications exist: FVC < 50% predicted; maximum inspiratory pressure < 60 cm H2O; nocturnal hypercarbia (pCO2 > 50 mm Hg for ≥ 2% of sleep time or a 10 mm Hg increase in pCO2 compared to awake baseline pCO2 for ≥ 2% of sleep time); nocturnal hypoxia (SpO2 ≤ 88% for ≥ 2% of sleep time or 5 minutes continuously); or apnea-hypopnea index ≥ 5. Daytime hypoventilation indicated by hypercarbia of > 45 mm Hg or baseline PO2 < 95% on room air is also an indication for nocturnal assisted ventilation.
● Individuals with advanced FRDA and their caregivers should be educated regarding the risk of respiratory complications including higher risk of severe infections and the role of impaired airway clearance.
● Risk of pneumonia can be reduced for those with more severe FRDA through appropriate vaccinations for bacterial and viral infections (such as pneumovax and annual flu vaccines) and “social distancing” strategies when in contact with others.


Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary