6.2 Breathing related sleep disturbance and nocturnal hypoventilation

6.2.1 The effects of Friedreich ataxia on sleep disordered breathing
Sleep disordered breathing (SDB) has not been extensively documented in Friedreich ataxia (FRDA). There is a single case report documenting a patient with severe FRDA and “arduous” breathing and oxygen desaturation, together with SDB at night (9). Manni et al (10) reported polysomnography on nine persons with various hereditary ataxias and reported SDB in three people with FRDA. In a study from Australia, Corben et al (11) administered the Epworth Sleepiness Scale to 82 individuals with FRDA and found abnormal values in 21. Polysomnography in these selected individuals documented obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in 17 of the 21. The risk of OSA in FRDA was estimated to be over 5 times that in the general population. In a web-based survey of FRDA individuals in the FARA registry (12), 16.4% reported a diagnosis of sleep apnea. Sleep apnea is associated with older age and/or longer duration of disease (11, 12).
SDB in neuromuscular disorders such as FRDA can result from different problems. Reduced muscle tone in the upper airway leads to OSA. Reduced respiratory muscle strength leading to reduced respiratory volumes and lessening chest wall compliance causing atelectasis and subsequent ventilation-perfusion mismatch can lead to nocturnal hypoventilation, even without sleep apnea, though this was not seen in the study from Australia (11). Both sleep apnea and nocturnal hypoventilation can lead to daytime symptoms that include excessive sleepiness, fatigue, poor concentration, morning headache, dyspnea and orthopnea.
6.2.2 Monitoring sleep disordered breathing
Monitoring for SDB should be done at least annually in individuals with FRDA with advanced disease (i.e., non-ambulatory; or earlier if symptoms of SDB are elicited) during clinic visits.
Monitoring at clinic visits should include:
● Administer a neuro-respiratory checklist including questions about orthopnea, dyspnea during ordinary daytime activities, apnea during the night, poor sleep quality during the night, morning headache, decreased attention and concentration during the daytime, excess daytime sleepiness, excessive fatigue and repeated chest infections (5)
● Administer a sleepiness questionnaire (e.g., Epworth sleepiness scale) and a fatigue scale
● Assess respiratory excursions and cough strength during physical examination
● Perform pulmonary function tests (PFT) to include forced vital capacity, maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures and peak expiratory cough flow
● Polysomnography with capnography if obstructive sleep apnea or nocturnal hypoventilation is suspected based on above clinic based assessments.
6.2.3 Management of sleep disordered breathing
● SDB primarily diagnosed as OSA can be managed with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) at night
● While CPAP is the primary treatment of OSA, alternative therapies may be used in certain situations. For a clear nasopharyngeal obstruction, nasal steroids or removal of obstruction may be indicated. Individuals with mild OSA may be prescribed a customized oral appliance to support the position of the mandible and promote airway patency during sleep.
● Nocturnal hypoventilation is managed by non-invasive ventilation using bi-level positive airway pressure (biPAP) or average volume assured pressure support (AVAPS) (see section 6.1: Management of reduced pulmonary function)
● General health measures, such as maintaining ideal weight, sleep hygiene and avoidance of alcohol, should be recommended
To inform clinical practice, more data are needed on the prevalence of SDB in FRDA, the risk factors associated with it and the effects of interventions on symptom reduction, quality of life and on progression of cardiac and neurological manifestations of FRDA

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary