9.2. Management strategies for scoliosis in Friedreich ataxia

9.2.1 Investigation of scoliosis
The usual method of investigation of scoliosis is antero-posterior and lateral full spine radiographs either standing or supine. However, Allard and colleagues (9) suggest this may lead to inconsistent measurement and recommends the use of a rotational booth. The Cobb method (18) is used to determine the degree of curve. Pelvic obliquity is defined as the angle between a line joining both iliac crests and a line intersecting the middle of the pedicles of L4 and L5 on the posteroanterior view (7, 19).
9.2.2 Interventions for scoliosis
A literature search from 1957 to 2021 revealed 14 articles related to management of scoliosis in Friedreich ataxia. The majority of these studies are retrospective, with sample sizes ranging from 1 to 78 (see Table 9.1 for details of each study).
Table 9.1: Summary of studies related to management of scoliosis in Friedreich ataxia

The goal of intervention in individuals with FRDA is to prevent progression of scoliosis, improve posture and the capacity for upright stability in those who are ambulatory, improve balance, and reduce the reliance on external orthoses for postural control and pressure/pain relief in those who are non-ambulatory (8). In addition, prevention of secondary respiratory complications is a significant factor to consider in the management of scoliosis in FRDA (19). In both ambulatory and non-ambulatory groups, pain is a significant indicator for intervention and thus successful intervention may have a significant impact on quality of life for people with FRDA.
Most authors recommend observation of children with a curve between 20o and 40o; however, they suggest that if the curve progresses beyond 40o, intervention is indicated (4, 7). Intervention can be non-invasive, such as the use of bracing in the ambulatory individual or the use of customized seating to limit progression of rotation and lateral deviation of the spine in non-ambulatory individuals. Although the efficacy of bracing in controlling deformity has been questioned (6), bracing may be particularly valuable in the very young and compliant person with FRDA to slow down progression and delay surgical correction (12). Unfortunately, bracing may interfere with ambulation and breathing and thus compliance may be an issue (4, 6, 9, 13).
Consideration of surgical intervention for scoliosis should take into account the negative effects of Implant failure, risk of infection and risk of loss of mobility in the recovery phase post-operatively (8). The fusion level (e.g., extending fusion to the pelvis), in particular the mobility status and projected loss of ambulation of each individual, should also be considered. Finally, the risk of intraoperative complications such as fluid loss/overload and associated cardiac issues need to be considered (8). Simon and colleagues (8) reviewed the rate of scoliosis progression in a small cohort of 28 individuals with FRDA who were managed conservatively and noted conservative treatment such as bracing did not influence the per-year rate of progression. Whilst there is little literature reporting post-operative mobility, Simon and colleagues (8) did report those who were still ambulatory when undergoing surgical intervention (n=5) were still able to walk two to five years postoperatively. As indicated by Rummey and colleagues (3), loss of ambulation often coincides with the requirement for scoliosis surgery, which confounds interpretation of surgical outcomes in regards to ambulation status.
Posterior fusion may be considered for progressive curves greater than 40o in the child who is still growing (4, 7, 9). Milbrandt and colleagues (6) recommend consideration of surgery when the curves approach 50o. Stricker and colleagues (20) expanded the criteria to include those individuals who experience significant loss of balance while sitting, poor control of the head and difficulty complying with orthotic devices. Piazzolla and colleagues (19) proposed that indications for surgery should include deformity causing functional problems (poor sitting balance, difficulties with hygiene), or impingement of the rib cage on the pelvis or a deformity that could progress to create any of all of these problems. It has been recommended that the fusion area extend from T2 to L3 or L4 and the instrumentation contoured to accommodate the usual thoracic kyphosis and lumbar lordosis (5, 6). However, some individuals may benefit from a shorter fusion and those who are non-ambulatory may require a fusion to the pelvis. The decision to fuse and the nature of the fusion should be based on each individual case taking into consideration the severity of the deformity, mobility and associated risks (12).
Spinal deformities are corrected using a posterior instrumented spinal fusion with pedicle screw fixation. In some cases, pelvic fixation may be required. Standard, modern intraoperative neuromonitoring may not be possible in all children with FRDA who need spine deformity correction, so the surgical team must be prepared to perform a wake-up test.
Cardiopulmonary assessment is essential prior to consideration of surgery to ensure cardiac function is not compromised during the procedure and in the post-operative phase (23).

It is important to delay surgery for as long as possible by use of conservative management. When the scoliosis has progressed in terms of curve magnitude, surgery should be considered after careful multidisciplinary evaluation (including cardiac function). In consideration of surgical management of scoliosis for individuals with FRDA, it is essential to consider issues related to complications and post-operative management. In addition, it is important to consider if, depending on the ambulation status of the patient, the fusion should be extended to the pelvis. Some studies reported post-operatively immobilization in orthoses for periods from 3 to 15 months (4, 13). Moreover, significant intraoperative blood loss may compound pre-existing cardiopulmonary issues (23); hence it is critical surgery is conducted in a facility with an intensive care unit (ICU) for initial post-operative care. Complications related to loss of mobility, de-conditioning, infection, failure of the implants, cardiopulmonary issues or death are reported in most studies. Post-operative requirements and availability in terms of acute community-based care and impact on life roles of the individual with FRDA (e.g., time off school, increase in level of dependency, possible deconditioning associated with post-operative recovery) need to be considered on a case-by-case basis. While there is some evidence that physical therapy may slow the progression and/or improve Cobb angles in idiopathic scoliosis (24), there is no evidence that such intervention would be effective in individuals with FRDA.
9.2.3 Conclusion
The available literature largely supports the role of surgery in correcting scoliosis in individuals with FRDA who demonstrate a curve >40o and in whom presence of a curve has a significant impact on health, independence, and quality of life. However, expert authors consider it is important to delay surgery for as long as possible by the use of conservative management. Bracing, while not proven to affect the prognosis of the deformity or the need for surgical correction, may be valuable in delaying surgical correction in the very young child. When the scoliosis has progressed in terms of Cobb angle and associated discomfort, surgery should be considered only after extensive pre-operative multidisciplinary evaluation, with particular attention to cardiorespiratory function. If surgery is considered, the need to extend fusion to the pelvis (depending on ambulation status of patient) should be assessed.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary