1.3 Genotype phenotype correlations in Friedreich ataxia

1.3.1 Phenotype for individuals homozygous for GAA triplet repeat expansion
In individuals with FRDA who are homozygous for a GAA triplet repeat expansion, the smaller allele size (GAA1) partially predicts disease evolution, phenotype, and prognosis, while the larger allele (GAA2) expansion is a weaker predictor of clinical variation (79).
Age at onset
Age at onset of symptom depends on the size of the expansions of both alleles but mainly correlates with the length of GAA1 (8, 11, 15, 53, 79, 80). Both GAA1 size and age at onset influence the rate of disease progression, the duration from onset to wheelchair dependency, and the age of loss of ambulation (11, 53, 79). Individuals with late-onset FRDA or very-late-onset FRDA have smaller GAA1 expansions than typical FRDA and a milder disease progression (73). Notably, smaller GAA1 expansion size may be associated with adult-onset spastic ataxia (81) or with spasticity and little ataxia (13). While GAA1 triplet expansions can account for 40% of the variability in age at onset and age at wheelchair dependency, GAA2 size is possibly responsible for 10% (53, 79).
No correlation has been found between GAA1 repeat length and age at onset of symptoms for individuals with non-neurological symptoms at onset (isolated cardiomyopathy or scoliosis) (51). The somatic instability of GAA repeats differs between tissues and may explain the lack of correlation between some symptoms, such as non-neurological symptoms, and GAA1 length (82).
Clinical features
Some clinical features of FRDA, such as dysarthria, sphincter disturbance, hearing loss, and decreased visual acuity appear to be linked mostly to disease duration (11, 79). GAA1 size correlates with the severity of proprioceptive impairment (23, 83-85) and pes cavus, scoliosis, and areflexia are more frequent with longer GAA1 expansions (11, 79). Both GAA1 and GAA2 repeat lengths correlate with dysphagia and lower-limb weakness (79).
Cardiomyopathy is the most frequent cause of mortality in FRDA. The increase in heart disease prevalence in association with higher repeat lengths became obvious when the first genotype-phenotype correlations were established (11, 53, 86). Evidence also suggests that left ventricular hypertrophy is significantly more prevalent in individuals with a GAA1 repeat size above 770 (84). More recently, another study showed that those with the worst cardiac evolution carry longer GAA repeats (23).
Diabetes mellitus is another important systemic non-neurological manifestation of FRDA, but the evidence regarding a correlation with repeat length is conflicting (11, 15, 53). Intriguingly, aberrant glucose metabolism has been shown to be associated with longer GAA1 repeat length (87).
1.3.2 Compound heterozygous phenotype
The phenotype of compound heterozygous individuals depends on the type of mutation on the non-expanded allele. Several mutations result in absent frataxin or loss of function and are associated with a typical FRDA phenotype (88). Individuals with missense mutations p.G130V and p.D122Y have an atypical phenotype with retained reflexes and without dysarthria (88). Null mutations result in an earlier age of onset and an increased risk of developing diabetes mellitus when compared to homozygous expansions (26). However, compound heterozygotes have a lower prevalence of cardiomyopathy (26).