8.2 Pain related to neuropathy


8.2.1 Neuropathy in Friedreich ataxia
Peripheral neuropathy occurs in FRDA due to dysfunction in the central somatosensory pathways and dorsal root ganglia (7, 8). The exact incidence and prevalence of painful peripheral neuropathy in FRDA is unknown, but treatment of neuropathy-related pain appears to be an unmet need. In 2020, the Friedreich’s Ataxia Clinical Management Guideline Patient and Parent Advisory Panel was interviewed on the consequences, urgency and priority of neuropathic pain, among other disease symptoms. More than half the respondents thought that painful neuropathy in FRDA was, or probably was a serious issue in this population, and many respondents thought that treatment of painful neuropathy in FRDA was a ‘priority’.
8.2.2 Management of painful neuropathy
There is a lack of studies regarding treatment of painful peripheral neuropathy in FRDA. However, there is considerable published research related to the treatment of neuropathic pain in other conditions, including diabetic peripheral neuropathy, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy, and HIV-related neuropathy (9). Clinical guidelines based on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in these conditions recommend several medications that could be considered to treat neuropathy related to FRDA, including pregabalin, venlafaxine, duloxetine, amitriptyline, gabapentin, valproate, opioids, and topical lidocaine and capsaicin (9). The use of these agents must be balanced against potential untoward side effects. Like all other aspects of FRDA, the neuropathy is best managed by a suitably trained health care professional who is familiar with the condition and the management of peripheral neuropathy (8).
Absence of distal sensation may make the individual more prone to the development of foot trauma leading to ulceration. The most common mechanism of injury is unperceived, excessive and repetitive pressure on plantar bony prominences. Foot deformities, which are very common in FRDA (10), may contribute to increased focal pressure, making ulceration more likely. Meticulous foot care is important and the input of a podiatrist may be required. This is even more important in those patients with FRDA who also have diabetes mellitus.
Neuropathic pain due to sensory neuropathy may be a significant feature in FRDA that can be treated in the same way as neuropathic pain due to any other cause. This includes the use of several antiepileptic drugs, such as gabapentin, pregabalin, and lamotrigine; tricyclic anti-depressant medication, such as amitriptyline; and the serotonin re-uptake inhibitor duloxetine (9, 11, 12)
Reduced mobility and weakness as well as the presence of a sensory neuropathy make FRDA patients more susceptible to focal neuropathies. If such mononeuropathies are clinically suspected, a neurophysiological assessment can help to confirm the diagnosis. If bothersome to the patient, such entrapment neuropathies can be alleviated by review of activities of daily living and wheelchair positioning, splinting or surgical release.



Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary