4.4 Management strategies for heart failure

There is currently no evidence to support any cardiac treatment for individuals with FRDA with normal LV ejection fraction and without cardiac symptoms or signs. A number of studies have investigated the effects of idebenone on LV wall thickness and/or LV mass but most of these studies have been small and the findings have not been consistent (2). Furthermore, a reduction of wall thickness or LV mass cannot be assumed to be a beneficial outcome of treatment in FRDA.
Spontaneous onset of HF symptoms is rarely seen in individuals with FRDA with increased LV wall thickness in the setting of a normal LVEF and normal sinus rhythm, and so regular HF medication therapy is unlikely to be indicated in such individuals. However, individuals with FRDA with such patterns of LV remodeling are more likely to develop symptoms and signs of acute HF in circumstances of stress, such as surgery and serious infections, particularly when accompanied by changes in intravascular volume. Careful fluid management to avoid depletion or overload is recommended in such situations and diuretic therapy could be required if symptoms or signs develop due to fluid overload.
4.4.1 Pharmacologic treatment of heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction
Adults
There are no RCT data regarding the treatment of either asymptomatic people with FRDA with reduced LVEF or of individuals with FRDA and with HF associated with reduced LVEF (HFREF). However, in the absence of any evidence for any FRDA disease-specific harmful effects of standard HF treatments it is reasonable to use standard HF guidelines as a guide to therapy in FRDA, recognizing that there could be differences in the pathophysiology of FRDA heart disease. The fundamentals of medication management for symptomatic HFREF are provided in the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of HF (79) and in the 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA update on the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline (85).
Children
There are no RCTs investigating the treatment of reduced LVEF with or without HF in children with FRDA. Neither is there even much data available from trials in children with HF due to a cardiomyopathy with reduced LVEF and causes other than FRDA. This is due in part to the difficulty of performing RCTs in children given the low prevalence of pediatric HFREF. Treatment of HFREF in children has been based on the results from adult studies.
4.4.2 Lifestyle factors and cautions to aid in management of heart failure
Lack of physical activity, poor diet, excessive consumption of salt and fluids and being overweight can exacerbate HF. Exercise-based rehabilitation can lead to reductions in hospitalizations for HF and improved quality of life and does not increase mortality in people with stable HF. Individuals who are requiring diuretics should generally be on a fluid restriction of less than 2L/day and more strict fluid restrictions may be necessary depending on the severity of the HF, the sodium level and the required doses of diuretics.
4.4.3 Device therapy and heart transplantation for heart failure
Prolongation of the QRS interval occurs in a proportion of people with advanced HF and has been associated with ventricular electromechanical delay (“dyssynchrony”) (83). QRS duration, dyssynchrony of contraction, and left bundle branch block (LBBB) in particular, have been identified as predictors of worsening HF, SCD, and total mortality. Modification of ventricular electromechanical delay with multisite ventricular pacing (biventricular pacing and cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)) can improve ventricular systolic function, ameliorate functional mitral regurgitation, and, in some individuals, induce favorable remodeling with reduction of cardiac chamber dimensions. Individuals with FRDA can develop HF due to severe systolic LV systolic dysfunction and can have a LBBB so CRT should be considered in such circumstances. There is a single case report of the successful use of a ventricular assist device in a patient with FRDA and heart failure due reduced LVEF (86).
Guidelines for CRT in patients with severe systolic HF are included in the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of HF (79).
Transplantation of the heart in FRDA is not common but has been reported (87-91). Individuals with FRDA appear to do well after transplantation.
4.4.4 Fluid and operative management of individuals with and without heart failure
The increased thickness of the left ventricle in FRDA results in a reduction in coronary flow reserve and less tolerance to tachycardia. The reduced size of the LV cavity in FRDA means a greater reliance on heart rate to maintain cardiac output and a reduction in stroke volume reserve. Hearts of individuals with FRDA will therefore have less tolerance for changes in hemodynamics such as bradycardia, tachycardia, low blood pressure, and increases or decreases in LV filling. Careful monitoring of fluid balance is essential in individuals with FRDA undergoing stressful events, such as scoliosis surgery or hydration therapy in the emergency room setting. In addition, rapid access to advanced technologies for supporting cardiac output following major surgery, such as dialysis and left ventricular assist devices, may be required.
Although significant advances have been made in understanding the molecular biology of FRDA, there remain substantial and fundamental gaps in our understanding of the clinical disease and natural history of FRDA. Furthermore, there are no RCTs of the treatment or prevention of arrhythmias or the treatment of HF and no trials showing any benefit of treatment to delay the onset of or prevent the development of left ventricular dysfunction in FRDA.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary