3.6 Dysphagia in Friedreich ataxia

This chapter describes the effects of Friedreich ataxia on swallowing, the functional consequences of swallowing impairment (dysphagia), and strategies for managing dysphagia. In making recommendations for management, the authors were tasked with answering the question:
For individuals with Friedreich ataxia, what management strategies could be implemented for dysphagia?
3.6.1 The effects of Friedreich ataxia on swallowing function
Dysphagia (swallowing impairment) impacts all individuals with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) at some stage during the disease (1). It worsens over time (2) and is linked to disease severity (3). Dysphagia in FRDA is characterized by slow oral and pharyngeal transit, poor bolus control, and delayed initiation of swallowing (1, 2). Specifically, FRDA can lead to decreased strength and coordination of the musculature used during swallowing. These changes often result in timing-based deficits, leading to increased risk of penetration and aspiration of food or liquids. Upper limb ataxia and difficulty controlling cutlery and cups while eating and drinking also impact mealtime safety.
At mid to later stages of FRDA, coughing or choking while drinking or during mealtimes and difficulty managing secretions become more common. Approximately 25% of people with FRDA are thought to aspirate silently on thin liquids (1), highlighting the need for detailed monitoring of mealtime safety.
3.6.2 Functional consequences of dysphagia
In some cases, dysphagia increases the likelihood of hospitalization for preventable conditions, such as pneumonia, delirium, urinary tract infections, and dehydration (4), and in most cases, it reduces quality of life (5). Changes to swallowing-related quality of life include extended mealtime duration (potentially intensified by upper limb ataxia and the challenges associated with feeding independently); altered self-perception (linked to changing roles within family and social groups); as well as reduced participation in social events and gatherings (1).
3.6.3 Management of dysphagia
Dysphagia management needs to consider impairment, function and swallowing-related quality of life (6). An important first step in management is comprehensive identification of how the dysphagia affects the individual with respect to impairment, activity and participation:

● Impairment can be tested via imaging methods such as videofluoroscopy (VFSS) or fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES). These tools can provide data on the characteristics of deficits as well as the presence of aspiration and penetration during swallowing.
● Activity can be measured by administering purposely designed clinical bedside examinations (CBE) such as the Clinical Assessment of Dysphagia in Neurodegeneration (CADN) (3). CBEs like CADN yield data on the day-to-day sequelae of the impairments, such as trialing liquids and varying food textures and consistencies and anamnesis (case history).
● Participation can be measured via standardized patient-reported outcomes or questionnaires that provide data on the impact of dysphagia on quality of life (7).


Four types of dysphagia management are potentially available for people with FRDA. These include behavioral swallowing intervention/swallowing rehabilitation, such as exercises; neuromuscular electrical stimulation; compensatory strategies, such as postural techniques and education on mealtime behaviors; and diet modification, including thickened fluids. There is currently no empirically documented population specific evidence on the benefit of swallowing therapy for individuals with FRDA. Evidence for the suggested therapies is based on diseases and disorders similar, but wholly distinct from FRDA. The presence of dysphagia in most individuals with FRDA highlights the need for effective and proven therapies for improving swallowing.

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary