4.3 Management strategies for arrhythmias in Friedreich ataxia

4.3.1 Atrial tachyarrhythmias
Rate controlling agents
No randomized controlled trial (RCT) has evaluated rate control of AF in FRDA, but there are no specific reasons why standard guidelines for rate control should not apply in FRDA. Recommendations for heart rate control in atrial fibrillation are provided in the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation (80).
In general, rate control is not the preferred option for long-term management in atrial arrhythmias in FRDA, as attaining and maintaining rate control, particularly during exercise in young people, can be difficult. Furthermore, young people tend to remain symptomatic when in AF even if reasonable rate control can be achieved. Nevertheless, in certain circumstances, rate control may still be a reasonable option. In such cases digoxin can be used irrespective of the left ventricular ejection fraction. A beta blocker will be the preferred option if there is a history of HF or reduced ejection fraction, but needs to be commenced slowly. If there is a reduced LVEF, verapamil and diltiazem are contraindicated because of their negative inotropic action.
Antiarrhythmic therapy
There are no RCTs which have examined the effectiveness or safety of antiarrhythmic drugs in FRDA for either reversion of atrial tachyarrhythmias or for maintenance of sinus rhythm following spontaneous, chemical or electrical cardioversion. However, the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation (80) can be used as a guide to antiarrhythmic treatment of AF in FRDA. There are important concerns raised in these guidelines about the safety of some of the antiarrhythmic medications in the setting of “organic heart disease” and it should be assumed that similar concerns apply to the abnormal heart in FRDA.
Antithrombotic therapy for prevention of thromboembolism related to atrial tachyarrhythmias
Based on data in subjects with AF and a dilated cardiomyopathy due to causes other than FRDA, a high risk of thromboembolism would be predicted for individuals with FRDA with AF and a reduced LVEF (80). Indeed, intracardiac thrombosis and systemic thromboembolism was described as a frequent finding in one post mortem study in FRDA (67). In the absence of a reduction in LVEF, where the risk of thromboembolism can be considered to be high, there are no specific reasons why the standard risk factors for thromboembolism in AF should not also apply to FRDA, and these may be a reasonable way to determine the need for anticoagulant therapy in FRDA. Anticoagulation with new oral anticoagulants, including dabigatran, rivoroxaban and apixaban, rather than a vitamin K antagonist, is recommended for individuals with FRDA and paroxysmal or permanent AF for the prevention of thromboembolism, unless there is a contraindication (81).
Ablation therapy
If the symptoms or ventricular response of atrial tachyarrhythmias are unable to be controlled with antiarrhythmic and/or ventricular rate control medications then there are electrophysiological options for management. Atrial flutter may be amenable to ablation therapy to prevent further episodes of atrial flutter. Atrial fibrillation can be treated with the percutaneous procedure of pulmonary vein isolation; however, the effectiveness of this technique in FRDA is currently unknown. There is also an option for atrioventricular (AV) node ablation or modification in combination with pacemaker insertion to prevent both a rapid ventricular response and bradycardia (80).
4.3.2 Ventricular arrhythmias
Antiarrhythmic therapy
There are no RCTs addressing the effectiveness or safety of antiarrhythmic drugs in FRDA for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. Furthermore, as there are few reports of symptomatic VT, syncope due to VT or resuscitated sudden death in FRDA, antiarrhythmic therapy to prevent recurrent ventricular arrhythmias will rarely be indicated. With the exception of beta blockers, no currently available antiarrhythmic drugs have been shown in RCTs to be effective in the primary management of people with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias or in the prevention of sudden cardiac death (SCD) (82). On the other hand, beta blockers are effective in suppressing ventricular ectopic beats and arrhythmias as well as in reducing SCD in a spectrum of cardiac disorders in people with and without HF (82). As a general rule, antiarrhythmic agents may be effective as adjunctive therapy in the management of arrhythmia-prone individuals under special circumstances. Because of potential adverse side effects of the available antiarrhythmic drugs, these agents must be used with considerable caution.
If individuals with FRDA develop ventricular arrhythmias, then beta blockers should be considered first-line therapy for secondary prevention, but if not effective at full therapeutic doses, then amiodarone or sotalol can be tried, with careful monitoring for adverse effects during administration. Amiodarone is the only option if beta blockers are contraindicated. Both sotalol and amiodarone have also been shown to reduce the frequency of internal cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) shock therapy. Sotalol should be used with caution in individuals with HF, severely reduced LVEF or renal dysfunction.
ICD for primary and secondary prevention of ventricular arrhythmias
There are no RCT data regarding ICD implantation for either primary or secondary prevention of ventricular arrhythmias in FRDA. Multiple clinical trials in other cardiac conditions have demonstrated a survival benefit of ICD use compared to antiarrhythmic therapy for secondary prevention of resuscitated SCD, sustained VT or sustained VF. It is recommended that the ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-Based Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities be used to guide ICD placement for the secondary prevention of SCD or sustained VT/VF in FRDA (83). Importantly, these guidelines do not support ICD placement if the predicted lifespan from other causes is less than a year.
Primary prevention of SCD refers to the use of ICDs in individuals who are at risk for, but have not yet had an episode of sustained VT, VF, or resuscitated cardiac arrest. Clinical trials have evaluated the risks and benefits of ICD implantation in prevention of sudden death and have shown improved survival with ICD in multiple patient populations, including those with HF due to non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy (83). However, making a recommendation to use an ICD for primary prevention in FRDA is not possible at this time due to absence of evidence for ventricular arrhythmias as a common cause of death.
One series of five subjects with FRDA who received ICD implantation has been reported (ages from 14-26 years) (84). However, none of this cohort had syncope, near syncope, symptomatic VT or a dilated cardiomyopathy with reduced LVEF (i.e. there were no standard indications for an ICD).

Jump to Recommendations



Jump to Best practice statements



Jump to Lay summary